---
title:  Bootstrap the CSS
author: Luke Goodman
layout: blogpost
categories: blog
id: blog
---
 
My best friend’s mother recently asked me to build a website for her small business. She complained that she had wasted so much of her own time teaching herself HTML and CSS so as to avoid using a web builder like Weebly or, as she said, “that one from the Super Bowl with the racy women” (I believe she meant GoDaddy.com). With a whole design drawn up and the HTML and content written, CSS came into play and she “just couldn’t get the things to move where they SHOULD be, where they’re SUPPOSED to be,” vaguely reminding me of the Adam Sandler’s putting struggles in the golf movie Happy Gilmore.
 
​Just about a year ago, as a beginner to web development, like her, I struggled to correctly align, to create functional and logically laid-out forms, to build a navigation bar that fit my needs and the page, to add certain types of content that didn’t screw up the rest of the page, and, after figuring all of this out, making the page not look like a glorified yet less functional Craigslist. The HTML was straightforward, but why, when I float this to the right and set this class position to relative and add a button to what should be the center of the page, do I get an ugly stack of content jutting from the side of the screen without any padding between? For the untrained eye, CSS can be a real hassle. For such a simple syntax, it should just do what I want, right?  
 
> “Why don't you just go HOME? That's your HOME! Are you too good for your HOME? ANSWER ME!” – Happy Gilmore​​​
 
Although I did eventually learn CSS and now consider myself fairly competent in it, I also recently took a look at Bootstrap, a front-end framework for developing responsive websites. To put it lightly, it would have made my web programming introduction a bit simpler. Bootstrap’s pre-packaged CSS material essentially requires only that one adds attributes to their HTML elements to layout the page. The most recent version (V3) provides a base grid layout that can be applied to any page and made responsive with Bootstrap’s available media queries. In a world where just over 40% of Internet browsing is done on mobile devices, Bootstrap’s mobile-first approach is very convenient.
 
The [Bootstrap website](www.getbootstrap.com) provides a clear and easy-to-reference guide through all of its features, and these features are incredibly thorough. Since it is semi-open-source, almost anything the average front-end developer may run into is covered including typography, forms and buttons, blockquotes, media content, tables, various colors and formats of all of the above, and so much more. The guide even provides recommendations as to how each color option can be effectively implemented to represent different effects on inputs or text (i.e. errors, warnings, information, success, etc.), which might be of assistance to some of the less design-eyed programmers. Clear example code and implementations are provided each step of the way which ensures that none of the Bootstrap applications are lost in translation. As an associate put earlier this morning (without my prompt), “I’m not sure how I feel about Bootstrap. It makes me feel like I’m cheating. It’s just too easy to do, like I’m not working enough.”
 
> “Just taaap it in... taaap it in." - Happy Gilmore
 
While it seems that Bootstrap has almost standardized its CSS features and limited the capabilities of design for a site, it has done anything but. The various colors, alignments, sizes, and formats for each element can create a plethora of sites with different styles and feels dependent upon the designer’s choices. It even has JavaScript addendums to help in adding smooth transitions, clear alerts, and intuitive/helpful features such as tabbed pages, dropdowns, and more. To get a feel for the variation in design Bootstrap can provide, one can visit [www.expo.getbootstrap.com](www.expo.getbootstrap.com).
 
Bootstrap is a fantastic tool that makes a developer’s job that much easier, allowing them to focus on the intention of the site, the back-end functionality, and all the other time-consuming facets of building on the web. In statistics, bootstrapping is the practice of resampling over time with a portion of the former sample and newer samples mixed to improve accuracy and quality. I’m not sure what the true namesake of Bootstrap is, but as a former statistics majors, I can attest that it lives up to that definition. Its open source model allows constant addition of new material and revision of current material. The improvement in the quality of material and how it addresses the needs and obstacles of web developers is evident between versions 2 and 3.
 
Although it is important for people who intend on taking web development to a higher level to learn the ins and outs of CSS, Bootstrap is a great resource to expedite and simplify the process and one-shot simple site builders can get away with just an understanding of this framework. In short, I will be recommending Bootstrap to my friend’s mother if she still has interest in learning to manage or build her own website and I will likely utilize it in my own ventures. One last quote:
 
> “Uh oh, Happy learned how to putt." - Happy Gilmore